*for an efficient code we must use the correct data type for each variable
*using a wrong data type means an inefficient code, and may lead to fatal mistakes

In C there are 4 Types of Data:
1)Basic Types:integer types,floating point types(arithmetic types)
2)enumerated types(arithmetic types, they are used to define variables that can onlyassign a certain,dicrete
integer values throughout the program).
3)user defined types(Pointer types,structure types,function types,array types,union types)
4)void types

*to choose a data type we must ask two questions:
a) what is the type of data (numeric(+ or -),alphabetic)?
this is to choose the correct data type(preventing errors)
b)what is the size of data(min,max)?
this is to choose the correct size of the datatype(for efficiency and preventing overflows)

*each data type has its size of storage in memory, and each byte in memory has its unique address.
*in memory values are stored in binary for, only zeros and ones exist in memory.
*number of values that can be carried by a data type=2^(number of bits)
*we use unsigned keyword if we are certain that the data will be +ve numbers only
*we use signed keyword if the data maybe +ve or -ve.
*it is the best practice to always write signed or unsigned before the data type, because it differs from
a compiler to the other whether the data type is signed or unsigned by default.

*Size of Data types:
char : 1 byte                unsigned range:0 to 2^(1*8) -1 , signed range:-2^(1*7) to 2^(1*7) -1
short: 2 byte
long : 4 byte
long long: 8 byte

* the best practice is to have full control be determining signed or unsigned, and setting size by(char,short,long,long long)

sizeof(); the sizeof() operator takes any variable or datatype and returns its size in  bytes


Format specifiers: 
sepecifier              data type               description
%i or %d :              int                     for signed integers
%f:                     float or double         
%c:                     char                    for a single character
%s:                     char*(string)           a sequence of characters ending with a null character \0
%u:                     unsigned int 
%p:                     pointer                 prints a memory address in hexadecimal
%x:                     int                     hexadecimal base
%o:                     int                     octal base

Format Modifiers (Width & Precision)
You can place modifiers between the % and the type character to control the appearance of the output.

A. Precision
Used after a decimal point (.), it controls the number of decimal places for floating-point numbers or the maximum number of characters for a string.
ex:
%.2f	Display a float with two digits after the decimal point.	10.50
%.5s	Display only the first five characters of a string.	Hello (from "Hello World")

B. Field Width:
A number placed before the decimal point sets the minimum field width,The output is padded with spaces if the value is shorter than the width
ex:
%10d	Display an integer in a field of 10 characters, right-justified.	42
%-10sDisplay a string in a field of 10 characters, left-justified (using the minus flag).Name      


variables definition and declaration:
syntax: datatype variable_name;

Declaration vs. Definition
This is a critical distinction in C programming, especially when dealing with global variables and the extern keyword.

1. Variable Declaration
A declaration simply introduces a variable's name and its type to the compiler. 
It's a promise that the variable exists somewhere.
Goal: Inform the compiler about the variable's existence so it can perform type checking.
Memory: Does not allocate memory (no storage is set aside).
Keywords: Often uses the extern keyword.
Examples of Declaration:

extern int total;

void func(int a); (Function declaration/prototype)

2. Variable Definition
A definition is where a variable is actually created. It tells the compiler to allocate the required amount of memory for that variable.
Goal: Instruct the compiler to reserve and label a piece of memory.
Memory: Allocates memory for the variable.
Keywords: Usually no storage class specifier is needed, but providing an initial value always makes it a definition.
Examples of Definition:
int total; (Default initialization to 0 for global variables)
int count = 5;
void func(int a) { /* body */ } (Function definition)

the extern keyword:
The extern keyword is a storage class specifier used to declare a variable or function that is defined in another file (or another part of the current file).
What it does: It tells the compiler, "The actual memory for this variable has been allocated elsewhere. Don't worry about allocating memory here; just remember its name and type so I can use it.
"Purpose: It allows you to share global variables between different source files in a multi-file C project without causing multiple definition errors during the linking stage.

variable list:
datatype var1,var2,var3;
ex: int test1,test2,tes3=8; test1 and test2 will hold garbage, test3 will hold 8

*any global uninitialized variable takes the value of zeros.
*any local non initialized variable takes garabge value.


Integer Promotion:
Integer promotion in C is a set of implicit conversion rules that automatically convert certain small integer types to a standard integer type (int or unsigned int) before arithmetic operations or function calls are performed.

It's a core concept designed to ensure that intermediate calculations use a data type that the CPU can handle efficiently (usually 32-bit or 64-bit integers).

🔑 The Rules of Integer Promotion
The compiler follows these simple, mandatory rules:

Small Integer Types: Any value whose type is rank less than or equal to int is converted to a plain int. This includes:

_Bool

char (both signed char and unsigned char)

short int (both signed short and unsigned short)

Enumeration types

nteger promotion is most noticeable in two main scenarios:

1. Arithmetic Operations
When you perform an operation involving small integer types, they are promoted before the calculation.

signed char a = 10;
unsigned char b = 200;

// Promotion occurs *before* addition:
int result = a + b;
a (10) is promoted to int (10).

b (200) is promoted to int (200).

The addition is performed as: 10 (int) + 200 (int) = 210 (int)

Integer promotion in C is a set of implicit conversion rules that automatically convert certain small integer types to a standard integer type (int or unsigned int) before arithmetic operations or function calls are performed.

It's a core concept designed to ensure that intermediate calculations use a data type that the CPU can handle efficiently (usually 32-bit or 64-bit integers).

🔑 The Rules of Integer Promotion
The compiler follows these simple, mandatory rules:

Small Integer Types: Any value whose type is rank less than or equal to int is converted to a plain int. This includes:

_Bool

char (both signed char and unsigned char)

short int (both signed short and unsigned short)

Enumeration types

Conversion Destination:

If the original type can represent all values of the original type, the value is converted to int.

If the original type cannot represent all its values in an int (which is rare, primarily happening if short and int are the same size), the value is converted to unsigned int.

In virtually all modern systems where int is 32-bit, small types are promoted to int.

💡 Practical Effects of Promotion
Integer promotion is most noticeable in two main scenarios:

1. Arithmetic Operations
When you perform an operation involving small integer types, they are promoted before the calculation.

C

signed char a = 10;
unsigned char b = 200;

// Promotion occurs *before* addition:
int result = a + b;
a (10) is promoted to int (10).

b (200) is promoted to int (200).

The addition is performed as: 10 (int) + 200 (int) = 210 (int).

2. Variadic Functions (printf and scanf)
This is where promotion is most critical and can lead to unexpected results if you don't use the correct format specifier.

When passing arguments to functions that accept a variable number of arguments (like printf), the small integer types are automatically promoted to int
If you pass a char, it's promoted to an int.

If you pass a float, it's promoted to a double (this is called Floating-Point Promotion)